Haleva 
Ezra Haleva
Professors Michael Glanzberg and Lauren Lyons
Intro to Philosophy 104, section 3
17 October 2020


Many people often take knowledge for granted. By this I don’t mean the content of what we know, but the act of knowing itself. Very often the verb “to know” requires no definition. We have some immediate and seemingly instinctual understanding of what it is to know. One can confidently proclaim “I know lemons are sour” without a second thought. This act of knowing, however, is nuanced and multifaceted. The concept of knowing is a human creation, and it is used by those humans to refer to different things. I mention this because essential to understanding the skeptical hypothesis and whether or not we “know” anything is to understand the different flavors of knowledge, and to which “know” this hypothesis refers. The two main “knowing”s I will explore are what I call, for convenience, “practical” knowing and “existential” or “certain” knowing. In my explanation of the skeptical hypothesis, I will state that it refers to the “existential” knowing, and not the “practical” knowing. After that I will present an argument for why we don’t know anything with certainty, using the skeptical hypothesis, and then some possible refutations to that argument. 
        What is “practical” knowing? Very easily and without hesitation, I would say I know lemons are sour. Indeed, if I wanted to verify this knowledge, I could go to the store, buy a lemon, taste it, and perceive its sour taste. However, if on tasting this lemon I found it to be sweet, I would say “I was wrong, I now know that lemons are only generally sour, and sometimes sweet.” This practical knowledge is founded in predicting what we will experience as a result of certain actions, and thus by this prediction we might guide our decisions on those actions. If I know that I don’t like sour things, and I know that lemons are sour, I can advise myself not to eat lemons. Experiential verification, then, is the very definition of practical knowledge. To predict whether a lemon will taste sour if I choose to eat it, I can eat one now, verify its sourness, and hope that others of its kind will also be sour if I should taste them. The practical truth of whether or not the lemon is sour then relates, not to some objective conceptual model, but to the experiences, or qualia, I will have when I eat it. Interestingly, this truth is then, like qualia, entirely subjective, since I may taste a lemon differently than others. Can I be entirely certain I will again experience a sour taste upon eating a lemon? No, only that it is extremely probable. This knowledge is only a prediction, and if the prediction is wrong, I adjust my set of predictions, my practical knowledge, and continue. I call it “practical” knowledge because it is the foundation of all scientific experiments, and arguably of all human function. It is not a knowledge of certainties, but of practical probabilities. 
        What is existential knowledge? This is a knowledge of absolute certainty. One could call it true, or even divine, knowledge, for if we know something in this way it is so robustly true it is in effect an axiom of existence. Discussions of metaphysics can also be said to concern an existential knowledge. If I say I know something existentially, I must be entirely certain of its truth. I must know that the statement in question is true under all conditions. For my entire life I may have tasted lemons and perceived them to be sour, but the existential truth of a lemon’s sourness will transcend to a much higher scope than that of just my life. And precisely because it transcends my life and experience, I can never verify completely the existential sourness of a lemon, for I can’t escape my own experience. I can’t taste the lemon with the tongue of some worldly objective third party, only with my own fallible sense of taste. The only thing I can verify is the practical knowledge that, to me, lemons have consistently tasted sour and use that to predict that lemons will continue to be sour. It is in this area of unverifiable existential knowledge that the general skeptical hypothesis lives. 
        What is the skeptical hypothesis? Many philosophers throughout time have proposed different versions of the skeptical hypothesis, expressing along with it their creativity. Descartes described a demon controlling our thoughts, the Wachowski siblings described The Matrix, and others a mad scientist keeping our brain in a vat. The common tale that all these stories tell is that the reality we perceive is totally wrong, and there is some other true reality we are blind too. The human exploit on which all these hypotheses capitalize is the limitation of our senses. We do not have some direct line of perceiving the world, but do so only through our senses, and ultimately our brain. To trust these senses completely, we would need some example of confirmed truth to be able to test our perceptions against it. The problem is, we could never compare our senses to anything else, for we perceive only through our senses by definition. We cannot know for certain that there isn’t a matrix manipulating our senses through a simulation of 1999. We cannot know for certain Descartes’ demon isn’t manipulating our senses and thoughts. And we cannot know for certain our senses aren’t the product of a mad scientist’s computer. 
        What would the implications be if a skeptical hypothesis, for example the matrix, were true? On a day to day level, apart perhaps from some dejavu, we wouldn’t perceive a difference. We would all get up for work in the morning, feeling the warmth of a virtual sun on our face, one identical to that of a real sun. We would all perform our fulfilling work solving the virtual problems of the matrix. Philosophers would still philosophize about this very skeptical hypothesis. We might have virtual children, virtual relationships, virtual accomplishments, all the meaningful events in a person’s life, completely identical to those of the real world. We would still know with practical knowledge that lemons are sour. I could still verify that fact by going to the virtual grocery store, purchasing a virtual lemon, virtually tasting it, and perceiving exactly the same sour taste. The qualia of a sour lemon would still be there! In short, our practical knowledge would be entirely unaffected. What would be affected is our existential knowledge. Whatever we knew practically, we could never know with certainty. Whether grass is really green or whether the sky is really blue, we could never say for certain. We would know everything of that perception, like we know everything of our own perception, to be practically true. We would know nothing of that perception to be existentially true. 
The skeptical hypothesis also enables the argument that, in our present reality too, we know nothing to be existentially true. This argument is the following:


1 - The certainty principle states that if I know one thing with certainty, I must also know with certainty that all conflicting things are false.
2 - The skeptical hypothesis conflicts with everything we know. It implies everything we know is wrong. 
3 - We can’t rule out the possibility of the skeptical hypothesis; we can never say with certainty that it itself is false. 
4 - For everything we might know, we then cannot rule out with certainty that all conflicting things are false.
5 - By violation of the certainty principle, we cannot know anything with certainty. 


        What are the problems, if any, with this argument? What are some possible refutations? One problem that might jump out at us is about truths that are seemingly independent from our senses. Mathematics, for example, seemingly has its root completely outside of the physical world. In step 2, then, we might have an error, for there is some ambiguity as to the scope of what the skeptical hypothesis is actually skeptical of. Is it skeptical of Mathematics, or only our knowledge of the physical world? I would argue yes, that even mathematics we only know to be practically true, but not existentially true. For this, I refer specifically to Descartes’ demon. The other skeptical hypotheses we’ve looked at have only addressed our physical senses, but Descartes’ also addresses our thoughts. Descartes’ demon, in manipulating one’s entire mind, would manipulate our logic, too. When I say one plus one equals two, I am depending upon the correctness of my mental math and this is the weak point. This mental computation is one whose accuracy I cannot verify with certainty, because of the possibility of Descartes’ demon. Just like I know the lemon to be sour, but outside the matrix it might be sweet, I know one plus one to be two, but if freed from the demon’s clutches on my mind I might see it to properly be 3. 
        Another refutation one could make is from Descartes’ classic quote, “I think, therefore I am.” This, again, is a question of the scope of how skeptical the skeptical hypothesis is. Perhaps we might be deceived in all manner of ways, but surely we must exist as a prerequisite of being deceived even? One could, following this same idea, conclude that, even if our perception is  entirely wrong, we can say with certainty that we are at least perceiving something. A small set of certain knowledge might be said, then, about two things, one, that we exist, and two, that we perceive. I tend to agree with this refutation, and in order to accommodate this, and even all other refutations of the same logic, we might change our conclusion of the above argument to say “We cannot know with certainty all things that the skeptical hypothesis conflicts with.” Leaving the low level of the specifics of what the skeptical hypothesis conflicts with to be determined later in more detail. 
What do these results mean? Does this mean we should throw out all of mathematics? Should we toss the encyclopedias in the garbage, raze the libraries and live anew as the wisest in all of Athens? Unfortunately for the anarchist, no, only that we might lower the reasonable standard of knowledge. Practically, we’ve proven Math; we’ve demonstrated gravity accelerates objects to the earth at 9.8 m/s^2; we’ve shown that grass is green; we know beyond a shadow of a doubt that the sky is blue, and yet we do not know these things with absolute certainty, but that is ok. We do not need our knowledge to be existential and absolutely certain. If it is practically true that is good enough. There is then an acceptable existential doubt of all human knowledge, yet our bridges still stand, our planes still fly, and our lemonade is still the perfect mix of sour and sweet.