Ezra Haleva
Philosophy 104 Section 3
27 September 2020


Chisolm’s Argument for Incompatibilism
In addressing Incompatibilism, Chisolm starts by presenting a common argument for compatibilism and refuting it. The argument he refutes takes the form of presenting two statements, one which allows free will and one that is implied by determinism. The argument then tries to show an equivalence between these two statements, which would make free will allowed by, or compatible with, determinism. The context Chisolm provides in presenting these statements is the case of a man’s choice to fire a gun. The first statement, A, is that, “He could have done otherwise”. This allows free will by accommodating both possible results of the choice that is seemingly not present in the rigidity of a deterministic reality. The second statement, B, is that “If he had chosen to do otherwise, then he would have done otherwise.” This statement appears to be verifiable even under the assumption of a deterministic reality, even when the “choosing” is taken to be the deterministic cause of the event of the man’s decision. Because these two statements are equivalent, the argument goes, B is true under determinism, B implies A, and A accommodates free will, therefore determinism accommodates free will. 
        The step here that Chisolm objects to is that B implies A. To Chisolm, the fact that the gun does or does not fire corresponding to an assumption about its deterministic cause does not show that both results are possible. If cause 1 implies effect 1 and cause 2 implies effect 2, one would still need to show the possibility of both cause 1 and cause 2 to show the possibility of both effect 1 and effect 2. In contrast, determinism seems to imply only cause 1 or Cause 2 is possible, but not both. Chisolm demonstrates this lack of continuity by elaborating on the statements further, saying that for statement B to imply A, a third statement, C, that “He could have chosen to do otherwise”, must also be true. If this statement is taken to be false, then B fails to imply A and the argument falls apart, and perhaps determinism implies C is always false. With that, Chisolm ends by concluding this argument for compatibilism is invalid, and determinism is therefore incompatible with free will. 
        An objection one can pose to Chisolm’s argument for incompatibilism is in his last step. In simply refuting the popular or standard argument for compatibilism, Chisolm concludes in favor of incompatibilism. All he seems to have shown, however, is that the argument he refuted is false, not necessarily that compatibilism itself is false. Comparably, an overly ambitious math student might put forth a proof for some famous unsolved conjecture, and a patient professor might show the student an error in his proof, but in doing so the professor hasn’t proved the conjecture to be false. He’s only shown that this student’s specific argument is invalid and, therefore, provides no result. In the same way, Chisolm’s argument, instead of proving or disproving compatibilism, simply provides no result.